<!-- p.1 -->

MAKING THE CROOKED STRAIGHT

A CONTRIBUTION TO BAHA’I APOLOGETICS

by

Udo Schaefer - Nicola Towfigh + Ulrich Gollmer

translated from the German by Dr. Geraldine Schuckelt

GR

GEORGE RONALD OXFORD

<!-- p.2 -->

B10 i

333 GEORGE RONALD, Publisher pute 46 High Street, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 2DN

Original German-language edition Quod curiositate cognoverunt, superbia Desinformation als Methode © Georg Olms Verlag GmbH, amiserunt. St Augustine, Sermones 151 1995, Hildesheim, Germany This translation © George Ronald 2000 All Rights Reserved Souls such as these cause the straight to become crooked. British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data ‘Abdu’l-Baha Will and Testament 2:13

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library Melius est, ut scandalum oriatur, quam ut veritas relinquatur.

Pope Gregory the Great (Hom. ISBN-0-85398-443-3 VII in Ezekiel, quoted from Migne Patrologiae Cursus Completus Series Latina, vol. 76, p. 842)

sagptieae:

Typesetting by Sigrun Schaefer

Printed and bound in Great Britain by Biddles, Ltd.

<!-- p.3 -->

Chapter 10 + Nicola Towfigh Some Aspects of Babi and Baha'i History His promulgation of his mission opened up a new chapter in the Book; inasmuch as the outpourings of His bounty are history of religion: that of the Baha’i Faith. In his scripture, the ceaseless and without limit.!05 Bab shall had make repeatedly manifest’ indicated (Van yuzhiruhu'lldh). the coming of Baha’u’llah ‘Him whom claimed God Believers are therefore required to recognize and accept the to be that very figure of prophecy. Word divine of guidance. God in its For new this form reason, if they the are Bab to continue demands to that reccive the The Bab wrote of the concept of progressive revelation, Muslims recognize him.!® Similarly, the Babis should turn to which trine is is based confirmed on the idea in the that scripture there is of only Baha’u’llah. one God, who This guides doc- ‘Him who God shall make manifest’ as soon as he should ap- and teaches humanity by means of religion. Hence, all the ma- pear.!°7 prophccy The of the moment previous a new religion revelation and supersedes appears, it it. fulfils The Bab the jor religions originate from a single source and are meant to praises the Promised One and mentions him, as Browne cor- guide people to lead their lives in accordance with the will of rectly states,!°8 on every page of the Persian Bayan. The Bab God and to promote the development of the human race. In the constantly exhorts his followers to accept the Promised One and text Dala’il-i-Sab’ih, the Bab speaks of the Messengers of God not to cause him the same suffering as that which the Bab him- in the following terms: self had endured at the hands of unbelievers. He orders the In the time of the First Manifestation the Primal Will Babis to repeat every nineteen days a verse from the Bayan on appeared in Adam; in the day of Noah it became the subject of acceptance of the Promised One.! Finally, he known in Noah; in the day of Abraham in Him; and stresses the rank of the Promised One by stating that the glory so in the day of Moses; the day of Jesus; the day of (Baha +) of the Bayan is Man yuzhiruhu ‘lldh.'10 Muhammad, the Apostle of God; t] + day of the ‘Point of manifest; the Bayan’; and the the day day of of the Him One Whom Who will God appear shall make after 1. The prophecy concerning the advent of Man yuzhi- <f{}¥—— Him Whom God shall make manifest. Hence the inner ruhu’lldh am meaning all the of the Prophets’, words uttered inasmuch by the as Apostle what shineth of God, re- ‘I The Bab evidently foresaw the imminent advent of the Prom- splendent in each one of Them hath been and will ever ised One whom he described in such glowing terms. This is remain the one and the same sun.!04 clear from many of the statements he made to contemporaries, Thus, the founder of each religion simultaneously announces the coming of the next divine Messenger: 105. ibid. 3:12:1 (Persian Bayan VI:16 (p. 87)). The Lord of the universe hath never raised up a 106. ibid. 3:20:2; 4:3:1; 4:5:2. established prophet nor His hath covenant He sent with down all a men, Book calling unless for He their hath 5:7:1, 107. 5:8:1; ibid. 3:21:1; 5:9:2; 6:4:1; 3:24:1; 6:13:2 3:26:1; and 3:32:1; others. 3:37:1; 5:4:1; 5:5:2; 5:6:1; acceptance of the next Revelation and of the next 108. JRAS XXLIV (October 1889), p. 927. 110. 109. Persian ibid. 11:14: Bayan cust VI:8. at orgs (ye lu oly os This verse not only em- Bayan 104. IT:8). The Bab, Selections 4:10:6 (p. 126); see also 3:39:1 (Persian phasizes stood as an the allusion exalted to station the person of the of Promised Baha’u’ lah. One but may also be under-

<!-- p.4 -->

Chapter 10 + Nicola Towfigh Some Aspects of Babi and Baha'i History whom he exhorted to recognize both himself and—as soon as One to arrive soon.!!4 Only this can explain the fact that during he appeared—the promised Man yuzhiruhu'lldh. In a letter the years im nediately following the martyrdom of the Bab so written to a Muslim clergyman named Sulayman, for instance, many proclaimed themselves to be the Promised One. he called upon the addressee to turn to him (the Bab), since he In contrast to this, the Azali doctrine that the Promised would otherwise be accursed. If he failed to accept the Bab, One was to appear only after 1511 or 2001 years was based on God would forgive him only if he tumed, by means of a letter, statements made by the Bab in the Persian Bayan concerning to ‘Him whom God shall make manifest’!!!—i.e. in the near Ghiydth (Help) and Mustaghdth (He who is called upon for future, during Sulayman’s lifetime. From another letter, written help),!!5 from which the numbers 1511 and 2001 are derived by by the Bab to the Sharif of Mecca and others, it is again evident means of the Abjad system. This is interpreted as an indication that the Bab expected the Promised One to appear during the that the promised Man yuzhiruhu 'lidh will not appear until this lifetime of the Sharif. The Bab admonished the Sharif of Mecca length of time has elapsed.!!© This argument was probably de- to embrace the Cause of God and to implore that the veloped by the Azalis in order to dismiss Baha’u’llah’s claim. matter of thine allegiance be brought to the attention of They certainly referred to this in their rejection of Baha’u’llah, Him Whom God shall make manifest, that He may as Browne confirms: ‘To these texts!!7 the Ezelis specially ap- graciously enable thee to prosper and cause thy fire to peal in justification of their rejection of Beha’u’llah’s claim to be transformed into light.!!2 be the Promised Deliverer . . .”!!8 It is clear from the words of Furthermore it is implied in the Persian Bayan that Man the not Bab conform in the to Persian that of Bayan, the Bab however, when that the the latter Azali expresses view does the yuzhiruhu'iladh Bab’s declaration would of his appear mission during (1844); the 19 i.e. years in the following period up the to hope that the Promised One would come before the end of the the year 1863, although God alone would know the hour of his Mustaghath: coming.!!3 The early Babis, too, clearly expected the Promised None knoweth save God as to when the Manifestation shall be. Whenever it occurs all have to follow the

111. The Bab, Selections 1:9:7. ber of the Wahid (19) for in each year Faith in one of the letters will 112. ibid. 1:7:3 (p. 30). appear’ (Browne, ‘A Summary of the Persian Bayan’, in Momen, Selec- 113. Persian gh Bayén dm dp VI:3. 9S coal The ple Persian glad text all opis reads coe as tl follows: 0s gardad, tions, p. 376). the term In the bi-harfi Persian expressing original, the that crucial the revelation phrase is bi-harfi will appear zéhir saly ase G syghe elses 5! ly Lig! tulad pale Cas through appearance a single is also letter prophesied of the Promised elsewhere One, in the i.e. Persian suddenly. Bayan; This see sudden also SIS yale ch yrs (plead jiglil dian A yd S ogy cil po Browne, JRAS XXLII (July 1889), p. 515. manifest, .. ie. ‘And God concerning knows in what the manifestation limit of years of He Him will manifest Whom God him; shall but many 114. were Mirz& convinced Haydar-‘Ali that confirms the advent in his of “Him memoirs Whom that: God ‘In shall those make days his advent is to be expected from the beginning of the Revelation until manifest” could not be far off (Stories from the Delight of Hearts, p. 8). the Faith number may occur of the at Vahid any moment.” (19) for Browne’s in each year translation the announcement of this passage of the is 115. 110. Persian See Kitdb-i-Nuqtatu Bayan 11:17, 'l-Kaf, TII:15. Intro., pp. xxvf. God somewhat shall manifest, inaccurate: God ‘And knows concerning in what the limit manifestation of years He of will Him manifest whom 11’. On Mustaghdath. him, but watch from the beginning of the Manifestation until the num- 118. JRAS (April 1892), p. 299.

<!-- p.5 -->

Chapter 10 ¢ Nicola Towfigh Some Aspects of Babi and Baha'i History

Point of Truth and thank God. However, it is hoped of 2. Two alleged proofs of the supremacy of Mirza Yahya in God’s and the grace Word that of God it will will arrive be exalted before by the it.!!9 Mustaghdath Baghdad It is obvious from these words that the Bab regards the Mus- After the attempt by a Babi to assassinate Nasiri’d-Din Shah in taghdth as a period of time during which the Manifestation will 1852, an unprecedented wave of persecution swept over the appear. Baha’u’llah evidently shares the Bab’s cyclical view Babis, with large numbers being arrested, tortured and killed. and also sees Ghiydth and Mustaghdth as cycles within which Baha’u’1lah, too, was arrested and imprisoned!23 for four months the Promised One will appear. He speaks of the year 9 within in the Siyah-Chal, a foul-smelling, vermin-infested, subterra- the Mustaghdth in which Man yuzhiruhu’llah has appeared.!2° nean dun;:eon in Teheran, until he was released as a result of In response to the Azali objection that he was already an- the combined intervention of the Russian ambassador, Count nouncing the advent of the Promiscd One, Baha’u’llah argued: Dolgorouki, pressure from his family and reports produced by Shake off, O heedless ones, the slumber of negligence, the Baha’w’llah courts dealing was compelled with the case.!24 to leave In the spite country of his shortly innocence, after- that spread ye through may behold the world. the radiance How foolish which His are glory those hath who wards. He was exiled to Baghdad,!° then part of the Ottoman murmur against the premature birth of His light. O ye who are inly blind! Whether too soon or too late, the evidences manifest. It of behoveth His effulgent you to ascertain glory are whether now actually or not Mirza 123. Husayn-‘Ali The official Nari Teheran (Baha’u’lléh’s gazette Vaqdyi-yi-Ittifaqiyih original name) and reported several other that such a light hath appeared. It is neither within your Babis, demned who by His had Majesty not been to found life imprisonment guilty of conspiracy, (issue no. had 82 dated been 10 con- D power nor mine to set the time at which it should be iq’adih 1268 AH/26 August 1852 CE). See the English translation of made its hour manifest. beforehand. God’s !2! inscrutable Wisdom hath fixed this persecution newspaper inflicted report, on which the Babis, provides in World an unvarnished Order: A Baha'i account Magazine, of the The Bab, too, was convinced that the Promised One ‘might ap- vol. 124. 13.2 Shoghi (Winter Effendi, 1978-79), God pp. Passes 12f. By, 104f. pear at any time’,!2? as Browne correctly observed. 125. A decree issued by Nasiri’d-Din pp. Shah commanded Baha’u’H4h to leave Persian territory within one month of his release from prison, although he was permitted to select the country of exile himself, as Fi- 119. Persian Bayan III:15. The Persian text reads: cicchia God Passes rightly By, points p. 106). out Russia’s (Baha’ismus, diplomatic p. 103; representative, see also Shoghi Count Effendi, Dol- Sh Gates seal dq JS SI aly siagl gc lay coy tll 0 Sab lll y pad spl casas old aypliy oad, ple Empire. gorouki, However, offered Baha’u’llah Baha’u’llah asylum did not in take the up territories this offer, of choosing the Russian to go BS phys I aK i 3! singh Uae BE conggl Judd possibly to Baghdad also instead to avoid ‘in pursuance being accused of an of unerring political instinct’ partisanship (ibid.), (see and experienced 120. Rahiq-i-Makhtim, by Bahé’u’!lah p. in 514. Teheran The year in the nine year refers 1852/53, to the nine summons years Baha’{ assertion International (Baha ‘ismus, Community p. 103) that (ed.), ‘according Bahd'u'llah, to his p. own 9), Ficicchia’s testimony’ after the Declaration of the Bab. On Mustaghdth see also Kitdb-i-Iqan Baha’u’llah ‘was escorted to the border by a guard of honour’ is incor- 276 (p. 248). rect. says only The statement that the party made was by Bahaé’u’llah ‘escorted by to officers which Ficicchia in the service here of refers the 121. Gleanings 50. esteemed and honoured governments of Persia and Russia’ (Epistle 36 122. A Traveller's Narrative, Intro., p. XVII. (p. 22)}—something quite different from a ‘guard of honour’.