{pdf_page=1}

MAKING THE CROOKED STRAIGHT A CONTRIBUTION TO BAHA'I APOLOGETICS by Udo Schaefer . Nicola Towfigh . Ulrich Gollmer translated from the German by Dr. Geraldine Schuckelt GR GEORGE RONALD OXFORD

{pdf_page=2}

BP 310. 333 GEORGE RONALD, Publisher T.riCe 46 High Street, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 2DN 2000 Original German-language edition Quod curiositate cognoverunt, superbia amiserunt. Desinformation als Methode  Georg Olms Verlag GmbH, St Augustine, Sermones 151 1995, Hildesheim, Germany This translation @ George Ronald 2000 All Rights Reserved Souls such as these cause the straight to become crooked. ' Abdu'1-Baha British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data. Will and Testament 2:13 A catalogue record for this book is available from the.  British Library Melius est, ut scandalum oriatur, quam ut veritas relinquatur. Pope Gregory the Great (Hom. VII in Ezekiel, quoted from Migne ISBN-0-85398-443-3 Patrologiae  Cursus Completus Series Latina, vol. 76, p. 842) Typesetting by Sigrun Schaefer Printed and bound in Great Britain by Biddles, Ltd.

{pdf_page=3}

Chapter 10 - Nicola Towfigh Some Aspects of Babi and Baha'i History. His promulgation of his mission opened up a new chapter in the Book; inasmuch as the outpourings of His bounty are history of religion: that of the Baha'i Faith. In his scripture, the ceaseless and without limit.105 Bab had repeatedly indicated the coming of Him whom God Believers are therefore required to recognize and accept the shall make manifest' (Man yuzhiruhu'llah). Baha'u'llah claimed Word of God in its new form if they are to continue to receive to be that very figure of prophecy. divine guidance. For this reason, the Bab demands that the The Bab wrote of the concept of progressive revelation,. Muslims recognize him.106 Similarly, the Babis should turn to which is confirmed in the scripture of Baha'u'llah. This doc- Him who God shall make manifest' as soon as he should ap- trine is based on the idea that there is only one God, who guides pear.107 The moment a new revelation appears, it fulfils the and teaches humanity by means of religion. Hence, all the ma- prophecy of the previous religion and supersedes it. The Bab jor religions originate from a single source and are meant to praises the Promised One and mentions him, as Browne cor- guide people to lead their lives in accordance with the will of rectly states,108 on every page of the Persian Bayan. The Bab God and to promote the development of the human race. In the constantly exhorts his followers to accept the Promised One and text Dala'il-i-Sab'ih, the Bab speaks of the Messengers of God not to cause him the same suffering as that which the Bab him- in the following terms: self had endured at the hands of unbelievers. He orders the In the time of the First Manifestation the Primal Will Babis to repeat every nineteen days a verse from the Bayan on appeared in Adam; in the day of Noah it became. the subject of acceptance of the Promised One.109 Finally, he  known in Noah, in the day of Abraham in Him, and stresses the rank of the Promised One by stating that the glory so in the day of Moses; the day of Jesus; the day of (Bahd ) of the Bayan is Man yuzhiruhu 'llah.110. Muhammad, the Apostle of God; tI o day of the 'Point of the Bayan'; the day of Him Whon God shall make 1. The prophecy concerning the advent of Man yuzhi- manifest; and the day of the One Who will appear after ruhu 'llah Him Whom God shall make manifest. Hence the inner meaning of the words uttered by the Apostle of God, I. The Bab evidently foresaw the imminent advent of the Prom- am all the Prophets', inasmuch as what shineth re- ised One whom he described in such glowing terms. This is splendent in each one of Them hath been and will ever clear from many of the statements he made to contemporaries, remain the one and the same sun.104 Thus, the founder of each religion simultaneously announces the coming of the next divine Messenger: 105. ibid. 3:12:1 (Persian Bayan VI:16 (p. 87)). The Lord of the universe hath never raised up a 106. ibid. 3:20:2, 4:3:1; 4:5:2. prophet nor hath He sent down a Book unless He hath 107. ibid. 3:21:1; 3:24:1; 3:26:1; 3:32:1; 3:37:1; 5:4:1; 5:5:2; 5:6:1; established His covenant with all men, calling for their 5:7:1; 5:8:1; 5:9:2; 6:4:1; 6:13:2 and others acceptance of the next Revelation and of the next 108. JRAS XXI.IV (October 1889), p. 927. 109. Persian Bayan VI:8. 104. The Bab, Selections 4:10:6 (p. 126), see also 3:39:1 (Persian phasizes the exalted station of the Promised One but may also be under- Bayan II:8). Stood as an allusion to the person of Baha'u'llah. 600 601

{pdf_page=4}

Chapter 10 - Nicola Towfigh Some Aspects of Babi and Baha'i History whom he exhorted to recognize both himself and--as soon as One to arrive soon.l14 Only this can explain the fact that during he appeared-the promised Man yuzhiruhu'llah. In a letter the years im'nediately following the martyrdom of the Bab so written to a Muslim clergyman named Sulayman, for instance, many proclai ned themselves to be the Promised One. he called upon the addressee to turn to him (the Bab), since he In contiast to this, the Azali doctrine that the Promised would otherwise be accursed. If he failed to accept the Bab One was to appear only after 1511 or 2001 years was based on God would forgive him only if he turned, by means of a letter, statements m.ide by the Bab in the Persian Bayan concerning to 'Him whom God shall make manifest'lll_i.e. in the near Ghiyath (Help) and Mustaghath (He who is called upon for future, during Sulayman's lifetime. From another letter, written help),115 fron which the numbers 1511 and 2001 are derived by by the Bab to the Sharif of Mecca and others, it is again evident. means of the Abjad system. This is interpreted as an indication that the Bab expected the Promised One to appear during the that the promised Man yuzhiruhu 'llah will not appear until this lifetime of the Sharif. The Bab admonished the Sharif of Mecca length of time has elapsed.116 This argument was probably de- veloped by the Azalis in order to dismiss Baha'u'llah's claim. to embrace the Cause of God and to implore that the  matter of thine allegiance be brought to the attention of They certainly referred to this in their rejection of Baha'u'llah, as Browne confirms: To these textsl17 the Ezelis specially ap- Him Whom God shall make manifest, that He may graciously enable thee to prosper and cause thy fire to peal in justification of their rejection of Beha'u'llah's claim to be transformed into light.112 the Bab in the Persian Bayan, however, that the Azali view does Furthermorc it is implied in the Persian Bayan that Man not conform to that of the Bab when the latter expresses the yuzhiruhu'llah would appear during the 19 years following the hope that the Promised One would come before the end of the Bab's declaration of his mission (1844); i.e. in the period up to the year 1863, although God alone would know the hour of his Mustaghath: coming.113 The early Babis, too, clearly expected the Promised  None knoweth save God as to when the Manifestation shall be. Whenever it occurs all have to follow the 111. The Bab, Selections 1:9:7. ber of the Wahid (19) for in each year Faith in one of the letters will 112. ibid. 1:7:3 (p. 30). appear' (Browne, A Summary of the Persian Bayan', in Momen, Selec- 113. Persian Bayan VI:3. The Persian text reads as follows: tions, p. 376). In the Persian original, the crucial phrase is bi-harfi zahir gardad, the term bi-harfi expressing that the revelation will appeai j1 uo 4 w cwI Nle aiyhas w +h! owb JJ through a single letter of the Promised One, i.e. suddenly. This sudden sly ax G x4b 1y j1U5 w1 yLy jUa jw appearance is also prophesied elsewhere in the Persian Bayan; see also Browne, JRAS XXI.III (July 1889), p. 515. .i.e. 'And concerning the manifestation of Him Whom God shal 114. Mirza Haydar-Ali confirms in his memoirs that: In those days manifest, God knows in what limit of years He will manifest him, but. many were convinced that the advent of "Him Whom God shall make his advent is to be expected from the beginning of the Revelation until. manifest" could not be far off' (Stories from the Delight of Hearts, p. 8). the number of the Vahid (19) for in each year the announcement of the 115. Persian Bayan II:17, III:15. Faith may occur at any moment.' Browne's translation of this passage is. 11. See Kitab-i-Nuqtatu'l-Kaf, Intro., pp. xxvf. somewhat inaccurate: 'And concerning the manifestation of Him whom God shall manifest, God knows in what limit of years He will manifest. 11?. On Mustaghath. him; but watch from the beginning of the Manifestation until the num- 118. JRAS (April 1892), p. 299. 602 603

{pdf_page=5}

Chapter 10 - Nicola Towfigh Some Aspects of Babi and Baha'i History Point of Truth and thank God. However, it is hoped of 2. Two alleged proofs of the supremacy of Mirza Yahya in God's grace that it will arrive before the Mustaghath Baghdad  and the Word of God will be exalted by it.119 After the attempt by a Babi to assassinate Nasiri'd-Din Shah in It is obvious from these words that the Bab regards the Mus- 1852, an unprecedented wave of persecution swept over the taghath as a period of time during which the Manifestation will Babis, with large numbers being arrested, tortured and killed. appear. Baha'u'llah evidently shares the Bab's cyclical view Baha'u'llah, too, was arrested and imprisonedi23 for four months and also sees Ghiyath and Mustaghath as cycles within which in the Siyah-Chal, a foul-smelling, vermin-infested, subterra- the Promised One will appear. He speaks of the year 9 within. nean dungeon in Teheran, until he was released as a result of the combined intervention of the Russian ambassador, Count In response to the Azali objection that he was already an- Dolgorouki, pressure from his family and reports produced by nouncing the advent of the Promised One, Baha'u'llah argued: the courts dealing with the case.124 In spite of his innocence, Shake off, O heedless ones, the slumber of negligence, Baha'u'llah was compelled to leave the country shortly after- that ye may behold the radiance which His glory hath wards. He was exiled to Baghdad,125 then part of the Ottoman spread through the world. How foolish are those who murmur against the premature birth of His light. O ye who are inly blind! whether too soon or too late, the 123. The official Teheran gazette Vaqdyi-yi-Ittifaqiyih reported that evidences of His effulgent glory are now actually Mirza Husayn- Ali Nuri (Baha'u'llah's original name) and several other manifest. It behoveth you to ascertain whether or not Babis, who had not been found guilty of conspiracy, had been con- such a light hath appeared. It is neither within your demned by His Majesty to life imprisonment (issue no. 82 dated 10 D) power nor mine to set the time at which it should be iq'adih 1268 AH/26 August 1852 CE). See the English translation of. made manifest. God's inscrutable Wisdom hath fixed this newspaper report, which provides an unvarnished account of the persecution inflicted on the Babis, in World Order: A Bahd't Magazine, vol. 13.2 (Winter 1978-79), pp. 12f. The Bab, too, was convinced that the Promised One *might ap. 124. Shoghi Effendi, God Passes By, pp. 104f.  pear at any time', 122 as Browne correctly observed. 125. A decree issued by Nasiri'd-Din Shah commanded Baha'u'llah to leave Persian territory within one month of his release from prison, although he was permitted to select the country of exile himself, as Fi- cicchia rightly points out (Baha'ismus, p. 103; see also Shoghi Effendi. 119. Persian Bayan III:15. The Persian text reads: God Passes By, p. 106). Russia's diplomatic representative, Count DoI-. juoi jK w4 wt eiy ja dI je cwy wh: Nle gorouki, offered Baha'u'llah asylum in the territories of the Russian Empire. However, Baha'u'llah did not take up this offer, choosing to go j1 yI 4SI wwl b uHl Ssy wyWi cysouhiy to Baghdad instead 'in pursuance of an unerring instinct' (ibid.), and suS c I uK Ji j swyi &ln G  cwy! Jhai possibly also to avoid being accused of political partisanship (see 120. Rahig-i-Makhtum, p. 514. The year nine refers to the summons Baha'i International Community (ed.), Bahd'u'llah, p. 9). Ficicchia's experienced by Baha'u'llah in Teheran in the year 1852/53, nine years assertion (Baha'ismus, p) 'according to his own testimony Baha'u'llah 'was escorted to the border by a guard of honour' is incor- after the Declaration of the Bab. On Mustaghath see also Kitab-i-Iqan rect. The statement made by Baha'u'llah to which Ficicchia here refers 276 (p. 248). says only that the party was 'escorted by officers in the service of the 121. Gleanings 50. esteemed and honoured governments of Persia and Russia' (Epistle 36 122. A Traveller's Narrative, Intro., p. XVII (p. 22)) something quite different from a *guard of honour' 604 605